Hello and welcome to the June episode of Monthly
Market Insights. I'm Phil Attreed, Barclays Head
of Wealth Specialists. And as usual, I'm joined
by Will Hobbs our Chief Investment Officer.
Now, Will, it's been another turbulent month
across investment markets and whilst I'm sure
it's very stimulating for the investment teams
in their day-to-day work, investors I think are
probably looking forward to the episode where
I'm going to be able to stop saying that.
100 per cent, Phil. I can't say it's going to
come anytime soon, I'm afraid, but yes, I agree.
I get that feeling as well. But anyway,
Will and I are going to have a go as usual
unpicking what's going on in the world. Also
what the path ahead might look like and so hot
topics really continue to be about oil, inflation,
central banks, and I suppose a little bit more
about the hunt for stock and
bond opportunities that might be
out there particularly at current levels. So,
Will, could you set the scene for us if you can?
Phil, that's not easy question actually more and
more difficult than usual. I'll try and do like a
brief world tour because each region is facing its
own set of quite individual challenges some of the
same ones as well, but with quite individual
toolkits as well. So if you start with the US
because that's still by miles the most important
for us as we know in terms of the outlook for
investment markets. If you start there, the good
news is that the data is okay. The economy is slowing,
but you want that to be the case. That sounds
perverse but as we've explained before this is
what central bankers are trying to achieve. This
is what mostly people want to achieve in order to
try and reconnect aggregate demand with aggregate
supply so that you get this inflationary pressures
under control again, but, they need to cool demand
for everything basically, for workers, for goods,
for services. But incoming economic data, the
latest batch of data suggest that the US economy
has quite a bit of cooling to do before the
central bankers will feel relieved enough to stop
trying to get interest rates up at such a sharp
level. Europe has a job to do too on this front,
in terms of that inflationary story. That's the
same thing really at work for somewhat subtler
different reasons but they've got obviously the
added complication of the unfolding tragedy in
Ukraine and proximity there and everything that's
going on there obviously creates a much more
uncertain outlook for the European economy. If you
think about if the gas supply which still could
be cut off that plunges Europe into an immediate
economic darkness and that's not quite foreseeable
very easily calculable in terms of the odds that
that might happen. So you want to be wary of
overconfidence there. In China, they're continuing
to, the policymakers continue to play ‘Waco mole’
against Omicron which as we know is a much more
transmissible variant, it's proving difficult as
the news from Shanghai this week suggests and
there you've seen a very sharp deterioration
in economic activity because of that battle and
that's made things very difficult in the short
run there. Further out, you should see a bounce
back, activity inevitably will bounce back but
we've said before that the outlook for China is
difficult as well. It's like I say, it's really
very different outlooks and different regions and
the big story on the consumer side is this excess
savings pile that we've talked about before: how
will that be deployed to what extent will it be
deployed and region to region? In the US it's
perceived to be a bit more evenly distributed
across households and therefore maybe a bit more
likely to be deployed and the latest spending data
showed that that was a little bit the case.
They're dipping into their excess savings.
That's a little bit more questionable in Europe,
UK as well. The perception here is that it's a
bit more unevenly distributed, more clustered in
the top 40% by income distribution and that has
a different outcome in terms of what you would
expect to be spent, if that all makes sense.
It does indeed. You made reference a
couple of times there but the big question
at the moment appears to be when we're likely to
see the friendlier side of central bankers again.
Yes, it'd be nice wouldn’t it? It feels a long
way away right now. It's amazing to think,
if you look at this year from a little over
a year ago and you look at what markets and
most were expecting at that stage and
forecasting for 2022, it was really about
central bankers sitting on their hands for
much of it, still in nurture mode, trying to
nurture the economy back from the blows of the
pandemic. And yet you fast forward to today and
you have got quite the opposite; you are already
in the US deep into rate-rising cycles, you've got
coming in the US, the next few meetings are
expected to be again chunky rate rises. They’re
going to be a good deal higher by the end of the
summer. The question mark for investors, like you
say, there is: when do those central bankers not
just stop raising interest rates, but when do they
change their communication a little bit? That will
be the thing for investors to watch. There’s not
much sign of it at the moment and you want to be a
little bit wary, the energy prices are now pushing
out some of those expectations with regards to
the plausible peaking inflation even in the US.
So it's a very complicated backdrop there.
I suspect a tough summer ahead. That's the
current expectation. That could change, like I
say, but that's our current base expectation.
And I suppose with that in mind, it'd
be pretty tempting to certainly wait
until making any substantial increases to stock
markets to equity exposure. Would that be fair?
Yes, so it's interesting isn't it? Because a lot
of people will look at pullbacks of the size
we've seen and look at it and say that's naturally
tantalising. If you look on a probability basis
you look at the size of the pullback relative
to historic pullbacks you would say that
buyers would get interested. We would say
it's not as easy as that really, the outlook as
I've described is sufficiently complicated to be
relatively low conviction. That's reflected in our
Tactical Asset Allocation book; there's a batch
of short-term positions the team focuses on to try
and add those little performance cherries here
and there to the overall SAA performance cake,
the Strategic Asset Allocation cake. But what you
can see there is that the book is what's called
relatively flat. We're not, there's not massive
positions at the moment. The team is scouring
the world for opportunity. But at the moment
it's discretion is the better part of valour.
Like I say the outlook for central banking and
inflation, it's so uncertain at the moment and
it is very, it's dictating, it’s a really
strong market influence at the moment that
inflation story and the uncertainty that
surrounds the short-term outlook there
should mean that for the moment anyway, we're
more cautiously positioned in that tactical book.
Yes, not a time to be too bold just yet. But I
guess one positive to take out of the start of
the year and some of the moves that we've seen
both in stocks and bonds is that the return
prospect I suppose maybe for the years ahead
maybe look a little bit more attractive than
they have done in the past. I think you'd made
reference that a little bit in what you just said.
Yes, this is a little bit, in these very difficult
times, I guess this is a weird thing,
but this is an investment video, isn't it? But
yes, you're right. I think your expected returns
probably are a little bit higher than they were.
The backup in bond yields is helpful there. Stocks
have fallen some distance in some corners as
well. So there's less froth and we talked in
our outlook actually about the need for some of
that froth to get blown off markets at some stage.
As always when it comes it's more shocking than
writing about it in advance or speaking about it
in advance. But yes, the expected returns are
higher and that really is always the finishing
point for our conversations. You must be so
bored of hearing it by now but hopefully it gets
through. Repetition, I hope, and conviction, it's
my personal belief as well, is that there's no
point in getting too caught up on what's going on
right now in a very confusing tactical backdrop.
The returns to longer term investments that's just
about making sure you're fully invested all the
time. Don't worry too much about what's going
on in the short term. These are fluctuations.
Your entry point right now as in days and
months won't make a big difference in terms
of your long-term returns expectation. Those
short-term tactical tweaks, that's more about
adding basis points here and there. Like I say
the meat and drink of your returns is just going
to be from being invested and having faith that
over the long term, humankind will continue to
invent new stuff and get better at using that new
stuff, productivity. And that was what will drive
your returns and as you know, I have strong
faith that will be the case, we can go through
that on another podcast again, but I think
that's the major point to take away as usual.
There’s always certainly interesting things
going on in the world. Will, thank you as always,
very insightful and thank you our viewers and
listeners for joining us. If you would like to
keep in touch with our views over the course of
the next month between episodes, please do seek
us out on our podcast Word on the Street where
we share all of our latest views on developments.